this is great area my name is Grayson
and I'm wearing a grey shirt so I feel
like all things are aligned is that it's
there's a great audience and when I get
nervous I make dad jokes
apparently so I'm gonna talk about bale
block and first though I'd like to get
into what inspired the project because I
think that that's equally important so
the first thing is the seti at home
project so this was part of an effort by
the Berkeley branch of steady steady
being the search for extraterrestrial
intelligence started by Carl Sagan and
Frank Drake the goal being to search for
signs of intelligent life in the solar
system and/or beyond our solar system
and also to put messages out into the
solar system beyond the solar system so
in 1999 they had a bit of a budget
crisis because you can imagine that
something like SETI is hard to fundraise
for or secure funds for from the
government and so what they did was they
created this application SETI at home
the idea is that you could download this
and run it on your home computer and it
would use your spare compute cycles to
take the raw data from the satellite
array that said he uses to kind of
listen crunch that data into a usable
research format for people at the
Berkeley Lab SETI Berkeley labs so they
could then use that and sort of chart
out what was going on so effectively
what it did was it created an ad hoc
supercomputer out of a network of
volunteers which was able to bridge this
funding gap that they had also of course
just the idea of cryptocurrency in
general and in particular the mining
process so when I was in grad school I
was putting myself through school by
managing this Media Lab on campus and I
think in 2011 during Occupy Wall Street
I started kind of like hearing people
talk about this emerging currency and I
became really interested in the mining
process which is what you know makes
this all possible so mining for those of
you don't
this collective verification process
looks at all the transactions on the
network make sure that that those are
possible and sort of crunches them and
puts them onto the blockchain to put it
very simply and in this process because
it requires hardware and software is
incentivized right so if you're running
mining software or a mining rig or
whatever you get you know little
fractions of a Bitcoin if you're part of
a mining pool as incentive to do this
right and so in this way I like to think
about it as in some ways generating
wealth out of thin air so when I was
doing this the Media Lab I you know
installed a script on some of the
computers so that it would run Bitcoin
mining while no one was using them for
like a week or something and this was
when Bitcoin was worth like basically no
money I think $20 or something and I
mined to Bitcoin in the span of a week
without really doing much and then sort
of forgot about it and then of course
years later when Bitcoin hit like
$15,000 or whatever it was maybe $20,000
I had this sense of regret for one but
also you know I I just kept thinking
about like how interesting that is that
those financial resources could be
generated that way by just sort of like
enlisting computers if I would have kept
doing that experiment and amassed a
bunch of Bitcoin you can bet that those
appetit stews would have a lot more
weapons right now
and finally the election of Donald Trump
inspired the project in the sense that
it was this moment when I had to rethink
how I felt about the utopian aspects of
the Internet the promises that were made
this you know the Internet I thought was
supposed to kind of resist these things
like fascism and ignorance but it
actually had been like usurped for these
purposes and all the while during the
election cycle the left was kind of you
know myself included like sharing
radical articles and liking things and
this was our political output and it had
resulted in this outcome so I started to
think about you know these other
influences these other inspirational
forces of Seti at home and Bitcoin
mining and wondered what what I could do
to kind of create a distributed mining
application where we could fund radical
projects that were going to be you know
threatened by the election of Donald
Trump like Planned Parenthood Greenpeace
and so on and then I got connected to
the new inquiry which is a radical
online magazine and they were really
interested in helping to collaborate on
this project and my opinion who's my
co-creator she had been writing about
the prison industrial complex and the
money bail system and she was like well
what really makes sense for this project
is for us to target bail and just this
is the part where I'm gonna really look
at my notes but bail is money or some
form of property that is deposited to
the court by the suspect in return for
the release from pretrial detention if
the suspect does not return to court the
bail is forfeited and the suspect may
possibly be brought up on charges of the
crime of failure to appear so this is
obviously problematic because it has a
disproportionate effect on low-income
people and in particular communities of
color in places like New York City
kalief Browder was a 16 year old kid
from the Bronx who stole a-- or was
accused of stealing a backpack and ended
up a waiting trial on Rikers Island he
couldn't afford bail for three years
before he took his own life
furthermore even for people who spend
just a little bit of time in pretrial
detention even if it's just a matter of
weeks or something their chances of
ending up with an innocent you know
verdict from the court goes down so in
other words the conviction rate for
people who are not detained for pretrial
detention is 50% for those who are
detained during pretrial detention
it's 92% so and it's important to
remember that people that are eligible
for bail is people that we're talking
about haven't been found guilty of
anything because they haven't had a
trial so what happens is they end up
taking plea bargains so the district
attorney
we'll say okay I know you don't want to
spend a bunch of time in jail you can't
afford bail so you're probably gonna be
found guilty anyway so how about you
accept a guilty plea and we'll reduce
the sentence associated with that right
so like instead of I don't know five
years in prison we'll let you do one or
whatever and so in New York State 90% of
people who can't afford bail will take
the plea bargain and so they'll never
see a fair trial and therefore are found
guilty of poverty and even still with
ninety percent of people taking plea
bargains instead of taking their cases
to trial the courts are still impacted
to the extent that on a Friday night at
midnight judges in New York City will be
hearing cases so the interesting thing
about that is that if twice as many
people could afford bail the courts
would just collapse under their own
weight because there wouldn't be enough
judges or courtrooms in the world to
hear all of these cases and this also
means that the justice system takes as a
basic assumption that most people won't
exercise their right to trial and so we
started to wonder what if we could tip
the scale so bail block-like City at
home is a downloadable application
basically you install it on your
computer can run on Mac Windows or Linux
and it runs in the background mining
cryptocurrency so for us we're not
mining Bitcoin because of this stuff
having to do with ASIC resistance and
whatever basically Manero is another
cryptocurrency that is my Nobel on
consumer level hardware in a way that
Bitcoin isn't this is just a screen grab
of it running in the background you can
see there's a little icon that gets
installed you can look at the stats you
can change your settings it's designed
to be unobtrusive it takes about as many
system resources as watching a youtube
video or something and it has zero
system priority which means that if you
are doing something else it will sort of
stop mining for a second and let you
finish your processes or whatever and so
in this way like SETI at home project
we enlist the help of a network of
volunteers to mine cryptocurrency and
this is the stats page grab from I guess
I've got that cursor on March 17th and
you can see that there's all kinds of
factors involved right because the level
of manera that we've received goes up
about the exchange value to US dollars
it's like this which some people say is
a problem with the project but actually
it's this sort of wild speculation that
were de turning to begin with and
putting to the service of paying
people's bail this was after like four
or five weeks of running the project we
were able to cut the Bronx freedom fund
which is a non-profit in New York City
they pay bail for people in New York
City particularly the Bronx we were able
to give them three thousand three
hundred thirty three dollars and seventy
seven cents which was just this is very
lucky number just kind of random we're
able to give that over to them in the
form of a check on Christmas so that
people could go from their organization
and get people out on bail the average
bail in New York City I it kind of goes
up and down every year but it's between
600 and 900 dollars so something like
three thousand dollars can actually go a
long way also something interesting
about bail is that bail funds are
revolving which means that if you pay
someone's bail and they don't skip town
or whatever otherwise meet the
conditions of their you know their bail
then the money gets returned to whoever
posted it so if you raise something like
a thousand dollars you can get out
theoretically like an infinite number of
people or a very large number of people
and also it's kind of designed with set
it and forget it mentality I don't know
if any remembers that infomercial said
it and forget it so we just want people
to kind of install it and let it run and
and do its thing and we have some stats
that we've we figured out here
so if 5,000 people ran bail block for 12
months we would raise one hundred and
fifty thousand dollars 18 hundred people
would be freed from pretrial detention
and that means that
over 1,600 cases would get dismissed but
also we'd like to think that the project
is worth more than the sum of its hash
rate it's meant as rhetorical software
as well we're trying to make a
comparison to the cash bail system which
is itself a currency mining application
that runs against low-income people and
communities of color
it's about our project is about
launching a radical criticism of the
cash bail system into the public
imaginary and we're part of that that
movement that's happening and actually
just a few days ago Bernie Sanders
introduced a bill to end the cash bail
system so I think there's a lot of
momentum and we're just kind of like
trying to play a part in stoking that
conversation and I think in thinking
about the horizon of activism I myself
working as an artist you know I used to
think that it was mainly about sort of
intervening on visual culture producing
for like countervailing images but now I
think considering something like the
operational image which was coined by
her in Farooqi which is basically an
understanding that the majority of
images now are produced not for human
eyes but for machines I'm you know sort
of thinking about the horizon of
activism being about creating systems
mounting systems that can intervene on
other systems and you know doing
something like inherently non visual
ways and you know I hope that we can use
this intervene on other systems such as
capitalism the prison industrial complex
and so on and I want to just take a
moment to name the people that worked on
this project - Maya Binyam Francis
saying JB Ravenna it's Sam Levine Rachel
Rosenfeld Madeline Varner Dhruv vatra
and the dark inquiry collective at large
and if you're interested in the project
you can check it out that's the URL and
that's my information if you want a
holler and
that's what I got thank you
[Applause]